WIP: upgrade from 7.17 guide (#3398)
elastic/docs-content: deploy-manage/upgrade/deployment-or-cluster/upgrade-717.md

---
applies_to:
  stack: ga
  serverless: unavailable
---
# Upgrade from 7.17 to {{version.stack}}

> % add enterprise search related comments?

Reviewer: good idea

    Before running this upgrade, all ingest components and client libraries must be upgraded to 8.19.x.

The following sections describe these phases in detail and point to the relevant documentation for each deployment type.

Refer to [upgrade paths](/deploy-manage/upgrade.md#upgrade-paths) for more information.

::::{dropdown} Alternative method: Reindex to upgrade
For basic use cases that do not rely on {{kib}} dashboards or {{stack}} features such as {{ml}}, transforms, {{kib}} alerting, or detection rules, instead of performing two sequential upgrades (7.17 → 8.19 → {{version.stack}}), you can create a new {{version.stack}} cluster or deployment and migrate your data from the 7.17 cluster by reindexing.

For detailed guidance on how to plan and execute this method, refer to [Reindex to upgrade](/deploy-manage/upgrade/prepare-to-upgrade.md#reindex-to-upgrade).

It may be suitable when:
- You prefer to build new infrastructure rather than modify an existing one.  
- You want to reduce the risk of performing two consecutive major upgrades.  
- You plan to redesign your topology or move to a new environment (for example, from self-managed to {{ech}} or {{ece}}).  

> This approach is intended for {{es}} use cases focused on indexing and querying your own data. If you need a smooth transition that preserves {{kib}} configurations and {{stack}} features data, follow the standard upgrade path instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach is intended for {{es}} use cases focused on indexing and querying your own data. If you need to preserve {{kib}} configurations and {{stack}} feature data, follow the standard upgrade path instead.
```

::::

## Upgrade planning [planning]

The [planning phase](/deploy-manage/upgrade/plan-upgrade.md) ensures that the upgrade is well understood, can be executed with minimal risk, and follows the [correct order](/deploy-manage/upgrade/plan-upgrade.md#upgrade-order).

It involves defining a clear sequence of actions and assessing the impact on [service availability](/deploy-manage/upgrade.md#availability-during-upgrades) and performance during the upgrade.

For the 7.17.x → 9.x upgrade path, the main planning outcome is a set of required actions to ensure compatibility across the ecosystem:

* **Ingest components:**

  Before the initial upgrade to 8.19.x, ensure that all ingest components ({{beats}}, {{agent}}, {{ls}}, APM) are on version 7.17.x.

  After upgrading the cluster to 8.19.x and before proceeding to {{version.stack}}, upgrade all ingest components to 8.19.x.

>   Refer to [Upgrade your ingest components](/deploy-manage/upgrade/ingest-components.md) for detailed upgrade instructions.

Reviewer: we'll need to link to 7.17, 8.19, and 9.x instructions here

Author: I'd defer the ingest components details to a next PR, so we can publish a robust version soon and then add these details for specific Logstash, Elastic Agent or Beats upgrades.

To prepare your deployment for the upgrade, complete the steps described in the [8.19 {{ecloud}} upgrade guide](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elastic-stack/8.19/upgrade-elastic-stack-for-elastic-cloud.html) up to the "Perform the upgrade" section. *Note: Although this guide refers to {{ecloud}}, the same preparation steps apply to ECE deployments.*

You should make sure to:

1. Run the **Upgrade Assistant** in {{kib}} and resolve all critical issues before continuing. The assistant helps you:
   * Reindex legacy indices (created before 7.0).  
   * Remove or update deprecated settings and mappings.  
   * Review deprecation logs for both {{es}} and {{kib}}.  

2. If you use [custom plugins or bundles](/deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/upload-custom-plugins-bundles.md), make sure they’re compatible with the next major release.  

3. As a temporary solution, you can use [REST API compatibility mode](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/8.19/rest-api-compatibility.html) if your custom client applications are affected by breaking changes. This mode should only serve as a bridge to ease the upgrade process, not as a long-term strategy.
:::

> :::{applies-item} { eck: }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::{applies-item} eck:
```

* Follow the steps in [Prepare to upgrade from 7.x](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elastic-stack/8.19/upgrading-elastic-stack.html#prepare-to-upgrade).  
* Review the [{{es}} upgrade setup guide](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/8.19/setup-upgrade.html) for additional details and best practices.  

If you're upgrading from an {{eck}} version earlier than 3.x, make sure to [upgrade ECK first](/deploy-manage/upgrade/orchestrator/upgrade-cloud-on-k8s.md) before performing the final upgrade to 9.x.
:::

:::{applies-item} self:

Before starting the upgrade, follow the [Prepare to upgrade from 7.x](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elastic-stack/8.19/upgrading-elastic-stack.html#prepare-to-upgrade) steps.

For additional details and best practices, review the [{{es}} upgrade setup guide](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/8.19/setup-upgrade.html).
:::

::::

### 8.19 upgrade execution

Keep the following considerations in mind when upgrading your deployment or cluster:

* If you use [Stack monitoring](/deploy-manage/monitor/stack-monitoring.md) with a dedicated monitoring cluster, upgrade your monitoring cluster first.

> * If you use [remote clusters](/deploy-manage/remote-clusters.md) functionality, upgrade the remote clusters first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If you use [remote cluster](/deploy-manage/remote-clusters.md) functionality, upgrade the remote clusters first.
```

To perform the upgrade, follow the instructions below for your specific deployment type:

::::{applies-switch}

:::{applies-item} ess:

To upgrade your deployment to 8.19, follow the steps in [Upgrade on Elastic Cloud → Perform the upgrade](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elastic-stack/8.19/upgrade-elastic-stack-for-elastic-cloud.html#perform-cloud-upgrade).  

During the upgrade process, all components of your deployment are upgraded in the expected order:
- {{es}}
- {{kib}}
- Integrations Server ({{fleet-server}} and APM)
:::

:::{applies-item} ece:

> To upgrade your deployment to 8.19, follow the steps in [Upgrade on Elastic Cloud → Perform the upgrade](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elastic-stack/8.19/upgrade-elastic-stack-for-elastic-cloud.html#perform-cloud-upgrade). *Note: Although this guide refers to {{ecloud}}, the same steps apply to ECE deployments.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To upgrade your deployment to 8.19, follow the steps in [Upgrade on Elastic Cloud → Perform the upgrade](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elastic-stack/8.19/upgrade-elastic-stack-for-elastic-cloud.html#perform-cloud-upgrade). 

:::{note}
Although this guide refers to {{ecloud}}, the same steps apply to ECE deployments.
:::
```

During the upgrade process, all components of your deployment are upgraded in the expected order:
- {{es}}  
- {{kib}}  
- Integrations Server ({{fleet-server}} and APM)  
:::

> :::{applies-item} { eck: }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::{applies-item} eck:
```

> To upgrade your cluster to 8.19, follow the steps in [Upgrade on ECK](/deploy-manage/upgrade/deployment-or-cluster/upgrade-on-eck.md).

Author: intro sentence added:

> In ECK, upgrades are performed declaratively by updating the `spec.version` field in the resource manifest. Once the new version is applied, the operator automatically orchestrates the upgrade, ensuring that each component is upgraded safely and in the correct order.

After upgrading {{es}} and {{kib}}, upgrade any [other Elastic applications](/deploy-manage/deploy/cloud-on-k8s/orchestrate-other-elastic-applications.md) connected to the cluster, such as {{fleet-server}} or Elastic APM.
:::

:::{applies-item} self:
To upgrade your cluster to 8.19, follow the steps in [Upgrade self-managed {{stack}}](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elastic-stack/8.19/upgrading-elastic-stack-on-prem.html).

Make sure to upgrade all components in the specified order.
:::

::::

### 8.19 upgrade validation

After completing the upgrade, verify that your system is fully operational. Check that data ingestion and search are working as expected, clients and integrations can connect, and {{kib}} is accessible.

> Confirm that the cluster is healthy and reports the expected version.

Reviewer: maybe we can hint at an api to use here

### Upgrade ingest components to 8.19.x

Because the upgrade to 8.19.x is an intermediate step toward {{version.stack}}, it's mandatory to upgrade all ingest components to 8.19.x before continuing with the next major upgrade.  

> Refer to [Upgrade your ingest components](/deploy-manage/upgrade/ingest-components.md) for more details.  

Author: I'll defer the ingest components details to a next PR.

This guide applies to all deployment types: ({{ech}} (ECH), {{ece}} (ECE), {{eck}} (ECK), and self-managed clusters) running {{es}} version **7.17.x**. If you are using an earlier version, [upgrade first to the latest 7.17 release](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elastic-stack/7.17/upgrading-elastic-stack.html) before proceeding.

## Overview

Upgrading from 7.17 to {{version.stack}} requires two major upgrades. Each major upgrade must be prepared and executed independently, although the planning phase can be shared.

1. **7.17.x → 8.19.x**
    This brings the cluster onto the latest supported 8.x release, which is the required intermediate version before upgrading to {{version.stack}}.
    Before running this upgrade, all ingest components and client libraries must be upgraded to 7.17.x.

2. **8.19.x → {{version.stack}}**
    This completes the upgrade to the latest 9.x release.
    Before running this upgrade, all ingest components and client libraries must be upgraded to 8.19.x.

:::{note}

> Upgrading only to version 8.19.x is also a supported path, as it remains a maintained and fully supported release. However, we recommend completing the upgrade to the latest {{version.stack}} version to take advantage of performance ongoing improvements and new features.

Reviewer: I think this might be a littleclearer

```suggestion
Upgrading only as far as {{stack}} 8.19.x is also a supported path, as 8.19.x remains a maintained and fully supported release. However, we recommend completing the upgrade to the latest version, {{version.stack}}, to take advantage of ongoing performance improvements and new features.
```

* **Orchestration platforms:**

  * **ECK**: If you are running an ECK version earlier than 3.x, you need to [upgrade ECK to 3.x](/deploy-manage/upgrade/orchestrator/upgrade-cloud-on-k8s.md) before the final upgrade to 9.x. This can be done either at the beginning, before the initial upgrade, or between the two upgrade phases.

  * **ECE**: If you are running an ECE version earlier than 4.x, you need to [upgrade your ECE platform to 4.x](/deploy-manage/upgrade/orchestrator/upgrade-cloud-enterprise.md) before the final upgrade to 9.x. This upgrade must be performed after upgrading your deployments to 8.19.x, because ECE 4.x is not compatible with 7.x deployments.

Finally, we strongly recommend [testing the full upgrade process in a non-production environment](/deploy-manage/upgrade/plan-upgrade.md#test-in-a-non-production-environment) before applying it to production.

## Upgrade Step 1: 7.17.x → 8.19.x

This step covers upgrading your deployment from 7.17.x to 8.19.x, following the [planning phase](#planning) and assuming that all ingest components and client libraries are compatible with 8.19.x.

> It's highly recommended to start this upgrade from the latest 7.17.x patch release to ensure that you’re using the most recent version of the **Upgrade Assistant**. You should also upgrade to the latest available 8.19.x patch release so that the same benefits apply when you later upgrade to 9.x.

Reviewer: this bolding doesn't add a lot of value imo
```suggestion
It's highly recommended to start this upgrade from the latest 7.17.x patch release to ensure that you’re using the most recent version of the Elastic Upgrade Assistant. You should also upgrade to the latest available 8.19.x patch release so that the same benefits apply when you later upgrade to 9.x.
```

### 8.19 upgrade preparations

The [upgrade preparation steps from 7.x](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elastic-stack/8.19/upgrading-elastic-stack.html#prepare-to-upgrade) are designed to prevent upgrade failures by detecting and addressing internal incompatibilities, including deprecated settings that are no longer supported in the next release.

During a major upgrade, the [**Upgrade Assistant**](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/7.17/upgrade-assistant.html) in {{kib}} 7.17 plays a critical role. It scans your cluster for deprecated settings, incompatible indices, and other issues that could prevent nodes from starting after the upgrade. The tool guides you through reindexing old indices, fixing configuration problems, and reviewing deprecation logs to ensure your deployment is fully compatible with the next major version. Ignoring its recommendations can lead to upgrade failures or cluster downtime.

> While the **Upgrade Assistant** helps you identify breaking changes that affect your deployment or cluster, it's still recommended to review the complete list of breaking changes and known issues in every release from your current version through your target version as part of the preparation phase. These are available in the following documents:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the Upgrade Assistant helps you identify breaking changes that affect your deployment or cluster, it's still recommended to review the complete list of breaking changes and known issues in every release from your current version through your target version as part of the preparation phase. These are available in the following documents:
```

* [{{es}} 8.x migration guide](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/8.19/breaking-changes.html)

> * [Kibana breaking changes summary](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/8.19/breaking-changes-summary.html)

Reviewer: are there apm/fleet or ent search breaking changes they need?

During the upgrade process, all components of your deployment are upgraded in the expected order:
- {{es}}
- {{kib}}
- Integrations Server ({{fleet-server}} and APM)
- Enterprise Search
::::

::::{applies-item} ece:

To upgrade your deployment to 8.19, follow the steps in [Upgrade on Elastic Cloud → Perform the upgrade](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elastic-stack/8.19/upgrade-elastic-stack-for-elastic-cloud.html#perform-cloud-upgrade). 

:::{note}
Although this guide refers to {{ecloud}}, the same steps apply to ECE deployments.
:::

During the upgrade process, all components of your deployment are upgraded in the expected order:
- {{es}}
- {{kib}}
- Integrations Server ({{fleet-server}} and APM)
- Enterprise Search
::::

::::{applies-item} eck:
In ECK, upgrades are performed declaratively by updating the `spec.version` field in the resource manifest. Once the new version is applied, the operator automatically orchestrates the rolling upgrade, ensuring that each component is upgraded safely and in the correct order.

> To upgrade your cluster to 8.19, follow the steps in [Upgrade on ECK](/deploy-manage/upgrade/deployment-or-cluster/upgrade-on-eck.md), and start upgrading the {{es}} and {{kib}} resources that represent the cluster.

Reviewer: annoying: can we say "In each manifest, update the `spec.version` field to `8.19`" explicitly here?

Author: done! looks much better now, thanks!

For more details, refer to the documentation of the following products and client libraries:

::::{dropdown} 8.19 {{stack}} ingest components
* {{beats}}: [Upgrade instructions](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/beats/libbeat/8.19/upgrading.html)
* {{ls}}: [Upgrade instructions](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/logstash/8.19/upgrading-logstash.html)
* {{fleet}} managed {{agent}}: [Upgrade instructions](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/fleet/8.19/upgrade-elastic-agent.html)
* Standalone {{agent}}: [Upgrade instructions](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/fleet/8.19/upgrade-standalone.html)
* Elastic APM: [Upgrade instructions](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/observability/8.19/apm-upgrade.html).
* Enterprise Search: [Upgrade and migration guides](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/enterprise-search/8.19/upgrading-and-migrating.html)

:::{note}
The Elastic APM Server and Enterprise Search components require manual upgrade only in ECK-managed or self-managed environments. In {{ech}} and {{ece}}, these components are upgraded automatically as part of the deployment upgrade process.
:::

::::

> ::::{dropdown} 8.19 {{es}} client libraries

Reviewer: eland missing?

Reviewer: looks like [it was unversioned ](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1bQQVc-QwwXDSd24Vw6Q62dnn_9bxsBeAzeWJAdyxdqI/edit?gid=1897179853#gid=1897179853)so only the one set of docs exists. not sure if there's a migration impact

* [Java](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/client/java-api-client/8.19/index.html)
* [JavaScript (Node.js)](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/client/javascript-api/8.19/index.html)
* [.NET](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/client/net-api/8.19/index.html)
* [PHP](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/client/php-api/8.19/index.html)
* [Python](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/client/python-api/8.19/index.html)
* [Ruby](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/client/ruby-api/8.19/index.html)
* [Rust](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/client/rust-api/8.19/overview.html)
::::

After upgrading your ingest components and client libraries, verify that they’re running correctly and sending data to the cluster before proceeding with the next major upgrade.

:::{note}
At this point, you have a fully operational {{stack}} 8.19.x environment. You can choose to remain on this version, as it’s fully maintained and supported.

However, we recommend upgrading to {{version.stack}} to benefit from the latest features and performance improvements.
:::

> ## Upgrade Step 2: 8.19.x → {{version.stack}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Upgrade step 2: 8.19.x → {{version.stack}}
```

This step covers upgrading your deployment from 8.19.x to {{version.stack}}, assuming that all ingest components have been upgraded to 8.19.x, and client libraries are compatible with 9.x.

It's highly recommended to start this upgrade from the latest 8.19.x patch release to ensure that you’re using the most recent version of the **Upgrade Assistant**.

> :::::{important} note for Enterprise Search users

Author: done, converted to admonition

While the **Upgrade Assistant** helps you identify breaking changes that affect your deployment or cluster, it's still recommended to review the complete list of breaking changes and known issues in every release from your current version through your target version as part of the preparation phase. These are available in the following documents:
* [{{es}} 9.x breaking changes](elasticsearch://release-notes/breaking-changes.md)
* [Kibana breaking changes summary](kibana://release-notes/breaking-changes.md)

Follow the guidelines below for your specific deployment type:

:::::{applies-switch}

::::{applies-item} ess:

The {{ecloud}} platform facilitates major upgrades by doing the following:
* Automatically creating a snapshot before the upgrade.
* Detecting deprecated settings and index compatibility issues.
* Blocking the upgrade until all issues are resolved through the Upgrade Assistant, ensuring a reliable outcome.

> To prepare your deployment for the upgrade, review the [prepare to upgrade guide](/deploy-manage/upgrade/prepare-to-upgrade.md). You should make sure to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To prepare your deployment for the upgrade, review the [Prepare to upgrade](/deploy-manage/upgrade/prepare-to-upgrade.md) guide. You should make sure to:
```

    * [Manage old Transform indices](/deploy-manage/upgrade/prepare-to-upgrade.md#manage-old-transform-indices)
    :::

2. If you use [custom plugins or bundles](/deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/upload-custom-plugins-bundles.md), make sure they're compatible with the next major release.

3. If you use custom-developed applications that are impacted by API-related breaking changes, make the recommended changes to ensure that your applications continue to operate as expected after the upgrade, or, as a temporary solution, you can use [REST API compatibility mode](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/rest-apis/compatibility.md) to submit requests to 9.x using the 8.x syntax.

    :::{note}
    The REST API compatibility mode should only serve as a bridge to ease the upgrade process, not as a long-term strategy. For a high-level description of the steps to ensure a smooth upgrade involving client applications that use this mode, refer to the [REST API compatibility workflow example](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/rest-apis/compatibility.md#_rest_api_compatibility_workflow).
    :::
::::

> ::::{applies-item} { eck: }

Author: I think some of your previous suggestions have been lost, sorry for that. I remember fixing this already! or at least trying, and the same for the parenthetical statement at the beginning :/

:::{important}
If you're running an {{eck}} version earlier than 3.x, ensure that you [upgrade ECK first](/deploy-manage/upgrade/orchestrator/upgrade-cloud-on-k8s.md). ECK 2.x is not compatible with {{stack}} version 9.
:::

Upgrade preparations for an ECK-managed cluster are similar to a self-managed deployment.

Before starting the upgrade follow the steps in [prepare to upgrade](/deploy-manage/upgrade/prepare-to-upgrade.md).

As part of your preparation, make sure to complete all tasks reported by the **Upgrade Assistant**, review any installed plugins for compatibility, and check whether custom client applications are affected by API-related breaking changes so you can address them before the upgrade.
::::

::::{applies-item} self:

> Before starting the upgrade, follow the [prepare to upgrade](/deploy-manage/upgrade/prepare-to-upgrade.md) steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before starting the upgrade, follow the steps in [Prepare to upgrade](/deploy-manage/upgrade/prepare-to-upgrade.md).
```

During the upgrade process all of your deployment components will be upgraded in the expected order:
- {{es}}
- {{kib}}
- Integrations Server ({{fleet-server}} and APM)
::::

::::{applies-item} ece:
To upgrade your deployment to {{version.stack}}, follow the steps in [Upgrade your deployment on ECE](/deploy-manage/upgrade/deployment-or-cluster/upgrade-on-ece.md#perform-the-upgrade).

If the [{{stack}} pack](/deploy-manage/deploy/cloud-enterprise/manage-elastic-stack-versions.md) for this version isn’t already added to the platform, make sure to add it before starting the upgrade.

During the upgrade process all of your deployment components will be upgraded in the expected order:
- {{es}}
- {{kib}}
- Integrations Server ({{fleet-server}} and APM)
::::

::::{applies-item} { eck: }
In ECK, upgrades are performed declaratively by updating the `spec.version` field in the resource manifest. Once the new version is applied, the operator automatically orchestrates the rolling upgrade, ensuring that each component is upgraded safely and in the correct order.

> To upgrade your cluster to {{version.stack}}, follow the steps in [Upgrade on ECK](/deploy-manage/upgrade/deployment-or-cluster/upgrade-on-eck.md), and start upgrading the {{es}} and {{kib}} resources that represent the cluster.

Author: done

For more details, refer to the documentation of the following products and client libraries:

::::{dropdown} {{version.stack}} {{stack}} ingest components
* {{beats}}: [Upgrade instructions](beats://reference/libbeat/upgrading.md)
* {{ls}}: [Upgrade instructions](logstash://reference/upgrading-logstash.md)
* {{fleet}} managed {{agent}}: [Upgrade instructions](/reference/fleet/upgrade-elastic-agent.md)
* Standalone {{agent}}: [Upgrade instructions](/reference/fleet/upgrade-standalone.md)
* Elastic APM: [Upgrade instructions](/solutions/observability/apm/upgrade.md)
::::

::::{dropdown} {{version.stack}} {{es}} client libraries
* [Go](go-elasticsearch://reference/index.md)
* [Java](elasticsearch-java://reference/index.md)
* [JavaScript (Node.js)](elasticsearch-js://reference/index.md)
* [.NET](elasticsearch-net://reference/index.md)
* [PHP](elasticsearch-php://reference/index.md)
* [Python](elasticsearch-py://reference/index.md)

>   * [Eland](eland://reference/index.md)

Reviewer: not sure if you intended this

```suggestion
* [Eland](eland://reference/index.md)
```
